=head1 COEXISTENCE

GNUpod can coexist with iTunes and other programs for the iPod.

If you want to use an iPod with GNUpod and used something other than
GNUpod (maybe iTunes) to perform the last update (adding songs,
editing playlists.. doing something..), you'll have to use
C<tunes2pod.pl> to update the (outdated) GNUtunesDB.

	tunes2pod.pl -m /mnt/ipod

The iPod is now ready again for GNUpod.

You have to do this because GNUpod stores its information in the
GNUtunesDB, but other programs access the iTunesDB directly. After you
did something with eg. iTunes, the GNUtunesDB would be 'outdated' and
you would lose any changes you made with iTunes. Running C<tunes2pod.pl>
will write a new GNUtunesDB which reflects the content of the current
iTunesDB.

=head1 DISASTER RECOVERY

It is recommended that before editing your
F<iPod_Control/.gnupod/GNUtunesDB.xml> file yourself, that you make a
back-up of it.  Most of the gnupod tools also make a backup of it before
making any changes and store that backup in
F<iPod_Control/.gnupod/GNUtunesDB.xml.old>.

=head2 Not running mktunes.pl

If you unmount your iPod without running C<mktunes.pl> then you'll find
that none of the changes you made (including adding songs) will appear to
have taken effect.  You should be able to remount your iPod, run
C<mktunes.pl> and unmount to recover from this.

=head2 After a crash (or a failure to unmount)

If your computer crashed while uploading/deleting songs, you may have
some 'zombie' files.  This can also occur if you forget to unmount your
iPod before you unplug it from the computer.

In this case, you can use C<gnupod_check.pl> to search 'lost' files.
gnupod_check.pl will tell you what you could do to fix it.

If gnupod_check.pl found many errors (or you lost your
F<GNUtunesDB.xml>), you can 'rebuild' an GNUtunesDB using:

     gnupod_addsong.pl --restore -m /mnt/ipod

This won't delete any songs on the iPod but will attempt to recreate the
F<GNUtunesDB.xml> file including the Songs which are on the iPod and their
mp3 header information.  Playlists, and any additional information you've
added may be lost.

If you have a recent copy of your F<GNUtunesDB.xml>, you may find it useful
to back-up the new, restored F<GNUtunesDB.xml> file and overwrite it with
yours.  Then run C<mktunes.pl>.  This might be sufficient to return your
iPod to the previous state (although if you've added or removed songs etc;
then it might not work).

=head1 BUGS

Email bug reports to C<< <bug-gnupod@nongnu.org> >>, a mailing
list whose archives can be found at
C<< <http://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/bug-gnupod/> >>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The full documentation for gnupod is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the info program and GNUpod are properly installed at your site, the command

    info gnupod

should give you access to the complete manual.
Individual programms have their own man page.

=over 4

=item *

L<gnupod_addsong> - Add songs, podcasts and books to your iPod.

=item *

L<gnupod_search> - Search, edit, delete files on your iPod.

=item *

L<GNUtunesDB> - More information on file format.

=item *

L<http://www.ipodlinux.org/wiki/ITunesDB> - More information on the ITunesDB
format.

=back

