=head2 Generic Program Information

=over 4

=item -h, --help

Display a brief help and exist.

=item --version

Output version information and exit.

=item -m, --mount=directory

iPod mount point, default is C<$IPOD_MOUNTPOINT>.

=item     --list-attributes

Display all attributes that can be used for the filter/view/sort options
and exit.

=back

=head2 Filter/Sort/View Options

=over 4

=item -f, --filter FILTERDEF[,FILTERDEF[,FILTERDEV...]]

Filter for songs that match FILTERDEF.

FILTERDEF ::= <attribute>["<"|">"|"="|"<="|">="|"=="|"!="|"~"|"~="|"=~"]<value>
  The operators "<", ">", "<=", ">=", "==", and "!=" work as you might expect.
  The operators "~", "~=", and "=~" symbolize regex match (no need for // though).
  The operator "=" checks equality on numeric fields and does regex match on strings.
  TODO: document value for boolean and time fields

Examples of filter options:
  --filter artist="Pink" would find "Pink", "Pink Floyd" and "spinki",
  --filter artist=="Pink" would find just "Pink" and not "pink" or "Pink Floyd",
  --filter 'year<2005' would find songs made before 2005,
  --filter 'addtime<2008-07-15' would find songs added before July 15th,
  --filter 'addtime>yesterday' would find songs added in the last 24h,
  --filter 'releasedate<last week' will find podcast entries that are older than a week.

Note
    --filter 'year=<1955,artist=Elvis'
  will find the early songs of Elvis and is equivalent to
    --filter 'year=<1955' --filter 'artist=Elvis'

Please note that "<" and ">" most probably need to be escaped on your shell prompt.
So you should probably use
    --filter 'addtime>yesterday'
  rather than
    --filter addtime>yesterday

=item -o, --or, --once

Make any one filter rule match (think OR instead of AND logic)

If the --once option is given any single match on one of the
filter rules is enough to make a song match. Otherwise all conditions
have to match a file.

Example:
    --filter 'year=<1955,artist=Elvis' --or
  would find songs by anybody up to 1955 and everything by Elvis (even the
songs recorded after 1955).

=item -s, --sort SORTDEF

Order results according to SORTDEF

SORTDEF ::= ["+"|"-"]<attribute>,[["+"|"-"]<attribute>] ...
  Is a comma separated list of fields to order the results by.
  A "-" (minus) reverses the sort order.
  Example "-year,+artist,+album,+songnum"
  Default "+addtime"

=item -v, --view VIEWDEF

Show song attributes listed in VIEWDEF

VIEWDEF ::= <attribute>[,<attribute>]...
  A comma separated list of fields that you want to see in the output.
  Example: "album,songnum,artist,title"
  Default: "id,artist,album,title"


The special attributes "default" and "all" can also be used in the --view argument.

Example:
  --view "filesize,default"
  is equivalent to
  --view "filesize,id,artist,album,title"

=item -l, --limit=N

Only the N first matches will be retained and the rest will be ignored.

If N is negative, the N first matches will be ignored and the rest will be retained.

Example:
  --limit=10
  will limit to the first 10 matches
  --limit=-3
  will skip the first 3 matches and retain the rest

Note:
  If you need the last 5 matches simply reverse the sort order and use --limit=5.

=back

=head2 Display Options

=over 4

=item --noheader

Don't print headers for result list.

=item --rawprint

Output of raw values instead of human readable ones. This includes all
timestamps and the attributes volume and soundcheck. Only attributes that
don't have a raw value like unixpath, are still computed.

=back
