.TH GNUPOD_ADDSONG "27" "April 2007" "gnupod_addsong.pl 0.99.2" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
gnupod_addsong.pl \- manual page for gnupod_addsong.pl 0.99.2
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gnupod_addsong.pl
[\fIOPTION\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
Upload Music to the iPod.
This Version can read MP3 AAC/ALAC (no DRM) and PCM (aka .wav) files.
It can even read FLAC files if Audio::FLAC is aviable and 
the \-\-decode switch was used. (Note: The iPod can't play FLAC files, in this case, 
gnupod_addsong.pl converts the FLAC files 'on-the-fly' using 'flac')
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fR
display this help and exit
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
output version information and exit
.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-mount=DIRECTORY\fR
iPod mountpoint. Default is $IPOD_MOUNTPOINT
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-restore\fR
Restore the iPod. Use this if your iPod is messed up. You will lose all playlists
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-duplicate\fR
Allow duplicate files. Per default, gnupod_addsong.pl checks for duplicate files. 
Use this switch to disable the check.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-playlist=NAME\fR
Add songs to this playlist
.TP
\fB\-\-disable\-v1\fR
Do not read ID3v1 Tags
.TP
\fB\-\-disable\-v2\fR
Do not read ID3v2 Tags
.TP
\fB\-\-decode=mp3|pcm|aac|aacbm\fR
Convert FLAC and OGG files On-The-Fly into choosen format and add them.
You need the Perl modules 'Audio::FLAC::Header' for FLAC files and 'Ogg::Vorbis::Header::PurePerl' for
OGG files. Lame is needed for MP3 Output and FAAC (>= 1.24) is needed for AAC output.
Btw: 'aacbm' means a Bookmark-AAC File (M4B)
See \fB\-\-reencode\fR to specify the quality of the output file.
.TP
\fB\-e\fR, \fB\-\-reencode=INT\fR
Re-encode while adding Files. 0=God / 9=Bad Quality. Lame is needed for MP3, FAAC for AAC (m4a).
.TP
\fB\-\-set\-artist=STRING\fR
Force Artist
.TP
\fB\-\-set\-album=STRING\fR
Force Album
.TP
\fB\-\-set\-genre=STRING\fR
Force Genre
.TP
\fB\-\-set\-rating=INT\fR
Force Rating: 0 = 0 starts / 20 = 1 star / 40 = 2 stars / 60 = 3 stars / 80 = 4 stars / 100 = 5 stars
.TP
\fB\-\-set\-playcount=INT\fR
Force Playcount
.TP
\fB\-\-set\-songnum\fR
Order songs on the iPod in the same order as they were added (= Overwrite songnum tag)
.TP
\fB\-\-min\-vol\-adj=INT\fR
Minimum volume adjustment done if ID3v2.4 RVA2 tags are found. Default is 0 (= Do nothing)
.TP
\fB\-\-max\-vol\-adj=INT\fR
Maximum volume adjustment done if ID3v2.4 RVA2 tags are found. Default is 0 (= Do nothing)
Using this two options, you can adjust the volume in the range -100% to +100%. 
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Adrian Ulrich
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <bug-gnupod@nongnu.org>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co Adrian Ulrich
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for
.B gnupod
is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the
.B info program
and
.B GNUpod
are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info gnupod
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
