.TH MKTUNES "23" "June 2005" "mktunes.pl 0.99.4" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mktunes.pl \- manual page for mktunes.pl 0.99.4
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mktunes.pl
[\fIOPTION\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
Convert GNUtunesDB.xml into iTunesDB format
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fR
display this help and exit
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
output version information and exit
.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-mount=DIRECTORY\fR
iPod mountpoint. Default is $IPOD_MOUNTPOINT
.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-ipod\-name=NAME\fR
iPod Name (For unlabeled iPods). iTunes displays this name, not the label.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-volume=VALUE\fR
Adjust volume +\-VALUE% (example: \-\-volume +5)
.TP
\fB\-e\fR, \fB\-\-energy\fR
Save energy (= Disable scrolling title)
.TP
\fB\-g\fR, \fB\-\-fwguid=HEXVAL\fR
Enforce iPod serial/firewire-guid. Late 2007 iPod models (3gen Nano, Classic, Touch) refuse to 
work unless the iTunesDB has been signed with a sha1 hash. This hash helps to detect corrupted 
databases, prevents sharing an iTunesDB between multiple iPods and locks out non-apple software.
GNUpod is able to create the required hash value if it knows the iPods serial number, this is a
16 chars long hex value such as: '000ba3100310abcf' and should be autodetected on GNU/Linux 
(via /proc/bus/usb/devices) and Solaris (via prtconf -v). Use this switch to set the serial if the
autodetection somehow fails to find the correct serial number of your iPod.
You can also specify  the value in your configuration file (gnupodrc) as 'mktunes.fwguid = 000ba3100310abcf'.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Adrian Ulrich
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <bug-gnupod@nongnu.org>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co Adrian Ulrich
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for
.B gnupod
is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the
.B info program
and
.B GNUpod
are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info gnupod
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
