\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-

@setfilename gnupod.info
@settitle GNUpod Manual
@setchapternewpage odd
@finalout
@include version.texi

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007 and 2008 Adrian Ulrich

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover texts being ``A GNU Manual'',
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the license
is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License''.

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have freedom to copy and modify
this GNU Manual, like GNU software.  Copies published by the Free
Software Foundation raise funds for GNU development.''
@end copying

@ifinfo
@dircategory GNU Packages
@direntry
* GNUpod: (gnupod).        Manage your iPod.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title GNUpod
@subtitle Manage your iPod
@author Adrian Ulrich
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage


@node Top, Requirements, , (dir)
@ifinfo
@chapter GNUpod
This edition of the @cite{GNUpod Manual}, last updated @value{UPDATED},
documents GNUpod Version @value{VERSION}
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Requirements::                    What you will need to use GNUpod
* Installing GNUpod::               How to install GNUpod and setup FireWire
* Using GNUpod::                    How to use the GNUpod-tools
* Problems::                        The FAQ



Appendices

* GNU Free Documentation License::  This manual is under the GNU Free
                                    Documentation License.

@end menu



@c ===========================================================================================
@node Requirements, Installing GNUpod, Top, Top
@chapter Requirements
@cindex requirements
@cindex Solaris
@cindex Darwin

To use GNUpod, the follwing is needed:

@itemize @bullet
@item iPod (HFS+ or FAT32)
@item Firewire card that is supported by the Operating System
@item Write support for HFS+ or FAT32
@item Perl 5.6 or 5.8
@item The Perl modules MP3::Info, File::Copy, Unicode::String, Digest::MD5 and XML::Parser
@item Basic knowledge of the shell
@end itemize

GNUpod is known to run on GNU/Linux, FreeBSD, Darwin (Mac OSX) and Solaris 9.
@c ===========================================================================================



@c ===========================================================================================
@node Installing GNUpod, Using GNUpod, Requirements, Top
@chapter Installing GNUpod
@menu
* Installation of GNUpod::          How to install the Scripts
* Using FireWire with GNU/Linux::   Setup FireWire on Linux
* Convert your Mac iPod::           How to convert an HFS+ formatted iPod
* Firmware update::                 How to upgrade the Firmware using GNU/Linux
@end menu



@node Installation of GNUpod
@section Installation of GNUpod
@cindex installation

The installation of GNUpod is very simple:

@example
tar -xzvf gnupod-tools-VERSION.tar.gz
cd gnupod-tools/
./configure
make install
@end example

The @w{@code{configure}} script checks if the desired Perl modules are installed.

On Debian GNU/Linux you'll simply have to run these commands to install the required Perl modules:
@example
apt-get install libfile-ncopy-perl
apt-get install libmp3-info-perl
apt-get install libunicode-string-perl
apt-get install libxml-parser-perl
apt-get install libxml-simple-perl
@end example


If you are using a RPM-based Distribution (Mandrake, RedHat, SuSE..) try http://www.rpmfind.net.

Another way is to install the modules 'by hand'.

http://search.cpan.org 

will help you to find the needed tarballs.
If you don't know how to install them, please read 

http://cpan.org/misc/cpan-faq.html#How_install_Perl_modules

(Maybe you'd like to use the CPAN-Shell.. Google knows how to use it ;-) )


@node Using FireWire with GNU/Linux
@section Using FireWire with GNU/Linux

Of course the Linux kernel must support FireWire. If the one you are using doesn't have FireWire support you'll have 
to recompile your Kernel. (It's also a good idea to update the Kernel when you are doing this...)

If you don't know how to compile the Linux kernel, please read http://www.kernelnewbies.org/faq/index.php3#compile


To get FireWire working, you should configure the Kernel like this:

@itemize @bullet
@item Code maturity level options - y
@item IEEE1394 (FireWire)/IEEE 1394 (FireWire) support (Experimental) - y
@item OHCI-1394 support - m
@item SBP-2 support - m
@end itemize

Feel free to build OHCI-1394 into the kernel ('y'), but make sure to compile 
SBP-2 support as module. It won't work well if you say 'y' there!
If you don't own an OHCI-1394 FireWire card you may need to use the LYNX driver instead.
But OHCI-1394 is the most common, please also have a look at http://www.linux1394.org

After you reboot with the new Kernel, you should now be able to mount the iPod.
First load the OHCI-1394 module if you said 'm' to OHCI-1394 support.
@example
modprobe ohci1394
@end example

Now plug in the iPod and wait until you can see the 'hook-symbol' and load the sbp2 module using
@example
modprobe sbp2
@end example

Please keep in mind that FireWire support is still experimental and you may see Kernel ``oopses'' and other nasty things.
If your system hangs after loading sbp2 or mounting the iPod you may try to load sbp2 like this:
@example
modprobe sbp2 sbp2_max_speed=0 sbp2_serialize_io=1 sbp2_force_inquiry_hack=1
@end example

This will slow down the transfer rate but should be much more stable.
Note: Firewire works very well with Linux 2.6. If you have problems
with Linux 2.4, you may want to upgrade to 2.6!


After loading sbp2, use @code{@w{dmesg}} to get some information.  The output
should look like this (if you are running linux 2.4.20 or older):

@example
SBP-2 module load options:
- Max speed supported: S400
- Max sectors per I/O supported: 255
- Max outstanding commands supported: 8
- Max outstanding commands per lun supported: 1
- Serialized I/O (debug): no
- Exclusive login: yes
  Vendor: Apple     Model: iPod              Rev: 1.21
  Type:   Direct-Access                      ANSI SCSI revision: 02
Attached scsi removable disk sdb at scsi1, channel 0, id 0, lun 0
SCSI device sdb: 9780750 512-byte hdwr sectors (5008 MB)
sda: test WP failed, assume Write Enabled
 sda: sda1 sda2
@end example

In this case, @code{@w{/dev/sda}} would be your iPod.

Linux 2.4.21 (and newer) doesn't show such verbose output and your iPod 
will not be detected while loading sbp2. Simply run @code{@w{rescan-scsi-bus.sh}} which
should find your iPod (See /proc/scsi/scsi). 
(You can download 'rescan-scsi-bus.sh' at http://www.garloff.de/kurt/linux/rescan-scsi-bus.sh)

You can now mount the iPod:
@example
mount -t vfat /dev/sda2 /mnt/ipod
@end example

It's a good idea to add a line like this to the fstab
@example
/dev/sda2   /mnt/ipod   vfat   defaults,user,noauto,umask=000
@end example

Note: avoid adding the 'sync' mount-option for flash based iPods (Shuffle, Nano) because 
flash drives have a limited number of write cycles.

Note2: as you can see, we assume an FAT32/VFAT formatted iPod (@code{@w{-t
vfat}}); if you own an HFS+ formatted iPod (aka. Mac-iPod) please have a look at the 
next section 'Convert your Mac iPod' before using @code{@w{mount}}.


@node Convert your Mac iPod
@section Convert your Mac iPod

If the Operating System you are running doesn't have write support for HFS+ and your iPod is 
HFS+ Formatted (aka 'Mac-iPod') you will have to reformat the iPod.

Note: Linux 2.6.4 includes HFS+ Read/WRITE Support(!)
It's still experimental and may do nasty things. (But it works well for me...) 
If you build your kernel with HFS+ support, you don't have to convert your iPod :)

Please note that you will need an fdisk for DOS-Style partitions, you will also need a kernel that supports 
Mac- (to read the firmware) and Dos-style (to access the device after converting it) partitions.
If you are using GNU/Linux on x86, your fdisk should be fine, but if you are running GNU/Linux on 
(for example) PowerPC you may have to get a suitable fdisk from the util-linux package which can
be retrieved from: ftp://ftp.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/util-linux/

Compile and install the pc-fdisk (and only the pc-fdisk!)
@example
tar -xjvf util-linux-X.XXx.tar.bz2
cd util-linux-X.XXx
./configure
cd fdisk
make
cp fdisk /usr/sbin/pc-fdisk
@end example


We assume that your iPod is at @code{@w{/dev/sda}}. (No, don't mount the iPod, simply plugin the iPod and make sure it
got detected with @code{@w{dmesg}}.

Here we go:

First, we 'backup' the current Firmware
@example
dd if=/dev/sda2 of=backup_firmware
@end example

This should result in a ~32MB file, now we have to kill the old partition map and force the kernel 
to re-read the new (empty) map
@example
dd if=/dev/zero of=/dev/sda bs=1M count=10
rmmod sbp2 && insmod sbp2
@end example

Now we can use 'pc-fdisk' to create a new partition layout:
@example
pc-fdisk /dev/sda [start fdisk]


Command (m for help): n [make new partition]
Command action
   e extended
   p primary partition (1-4)
p we want primary
Partition number (1-4): 1
First cylinder (1-608, default 1): [just press enter]
Using default value 1
Last cylinder or +size or +sizeM or +sizeK (1-608, default 608): +32M [32M is the default for 1.x iPods]

Command (m for help): n
Command action
   e extended
   p primary partition (1-4)
p
Partition number (1-4): 2
First cylinder (6-608, default 6): 6 [Just use the default value, press ENTER (don't worry if it isn't 6)]
Using default value 6
Last cylinder or +size or +sizeM or +sizeK (6-608, default 608): [press ENTER]
Using default value 608 [If you don't own a 5gb iPod, this value will be different, don't care about it]

Command (m for help): t [Modify type]
Partition number (1-4): 1
Hex code (type L to list codes): 0 [we don't care about the warning below]
Type 0 means free space to many systems
(but not to Linux). Having partitions of
type 0 is probably unwise. You can delete
a partition using the `d' command.
Changed system type of partition 1 to 0 (Empty)

Command (m for help): t
Partition number (1-4): 2 [this is where data will go]
Hex code (type L to list codes): b [b=FAT32]
Changed system type of partition 2 to b (Win95 FAT32)


Command (m for help): w [Writing new partition. Can take a while.]
The partition table has been altered!

Calling ioctl() to re-read partition table.
Syncing disks.
@end example

Note: The first partition doesn't have to be 32M, it just needs enough space to hold the firmware 
image (6M would be okay for firmware 130.bin).
Now we can rewrite the Firmwarebackup we created above.
@example
dd if=backup_firmware of=/dev/sda1
@end example

You may ask why we now write the Firmware to sda1 while we read it from sda2, the answer is simple:
Before running fdisk, the iPod was a Mac-iPod with a different Partition layout, but now the iPod is a Windows-iPod, belive me: sda1 
is correct.

After writing back the Firmware we can format the iPod:
@example
mkfs.vfat -F 32 -n "LUNIX" /dev/sda2
@end example

"LUNIX" is the name of the iPod, you can use another name if you like. After mkfs.vfat is done, we remove sbp2:
@example
rmmod sbp2
@end example

Unplug the iPod and pray. If everything went well, the iPod boots up :).
If not, reread this section, if you are lost, feel free to drop me a mail: bug-gnupod@@nongnu.org
(Btw: If you can't get the iPod into diskmode again, try this: Reboot the iPod by pressing
 'MENU+PLAY' ~ 5 seconds. While the iPod is booting, press (and hold) |<<+>>| (=Forced Diskmode))

It's a good idea to edit @code{@w{/etc/fstab}} and add a line for the iPod:
@example
/dev/sda2   /mnt/ipod   vfat   defaults,user,noauto,umask=000
@end example



@node Firmware update
@section Firmware update

** Don't update the Firmware just for fun, only do it if you need a 
new Firmware and/or the documentation told you to do this **

Note: These steps do not work on late 2007 iPods (such as Classic, Touch and 3th gen. Nano).

Setup Firewire (or USB) as described in 'Using FireWire with GNU/Linux', load the modules and make sure that sbp2 detected your iPod.
Mount the iPod and run @code{@w{mktunes.pl}} to bring the device into a 'clean' state. Unmount the iPod after mktunes.pl finishes 
but do *not* unplug the iPod. Ready? Ok, we assume your iPod is @code{@w{/dev/sda}}:

First you need to get a new Firmware image. 
Checkout the latest firmware list:
@example
wget -O list.gz http://ax.phobos.apple.com.edgesuite.net//WebObjects/MZStore.woa/wa/com.apple.jingle.appserver.client.MZITunesClientCheck/version
gunzip list.gz
@end example

Open the list in a text editor and find the correct Fimrware-URL for your iPod model:
@example
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-3877.20070914.n9gGb/iPod_24.1.0.1.ipsw</string>  iPod Classic (2007)
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-2790.20061206.iPr9t/iPod_25.1.2.1.ipsw</string>  iPod Video late 5th Gen (30 or 80 gb)
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-3878.20070914.P0omB/iPod_26.1.0.1.ipsw</string>  ipod Nano 3th Generation
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-3326.20070507.0Pm87/iPod_29.1.1.3.ipsw</string>  iPod Nano 2nd Generation
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-3316.20070618.9n1bC/iPod_130.1.0.3.ipsw</string> iPod Shuffle 2nd Generation
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-3317.20070618.nBh6t/iPod_131.1.0.3.ipsw</string> iPod Shuffle 2nd Generation
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-2975.20061218.in8Uq/iPod_128.1.1.5.ipsw</string> iPod Shuffle 1st Generation
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-2692.20060912.pODcW/iPod_10.3.1.1.ipsw</string>  iPod Clickwheel
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-2694.20060912.ipDcD/iPod_11.1.2.1.ipsw</string>  iPod Photo
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-2788.20061206.nS1yA/iPod_13.1.2.1.ipsw</string>  iPod 5th Gen.
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-3190.20070315.p0oj7/iPod_14.1.3.1.ipsw</string>  iPod Nano 1st Generation
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-3191.20070315.BgV6t/iPod_17.1.3.1.ipsw</string>  iPod Nano 1st Generation
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-3325.20070507.KnB7v/iPod_19.1.1.3.ipsw</string>  iPod Nano 2nd Generation
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-2686.20060912.ipTsW/iPod_1.1.5.ipsw</string>     Scroll-Wheel iPod (1st iPod ever)
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-2687.20060912.IPwdC/iPod_2.2.3.ipsw</string>     iPod 'Dock connector'
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-2688.20060912.iDMni/iPod_3.1.4.1.ipsw</string>   iPod mini 1st Generation
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-2691.20060912.ipDcw/iPod_4.3.1.1.ipsw</string>   iPod Clickwheel
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-2693.20060912.PdwCD/iPod_5.1.2.1.ipsw</string>   iPod Photo
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-2689.20060912.ipDmn/iPod_6.1.4.1.ipsw</string>   iPod mini 1st Generation
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-2690.20060912.PdMin/iPod_7.1.4.1.ipsw</string>   iPod mini 2nd Generation (?)
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-2953.20061218.yRet5/iPod_129.1.1.5.ipsw</string> iPod Shuffle 1st Generation
    <string>http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-2789.20061206.9IIut/iPod_20.1.2.1.ipsw</string>  iPod 5th Gen.
@end example

Download the correct firmware image for your iPod (http://docs.info.apple.com/article.html?artnum=61688 should help you identify our iPod model) and extract it:
@example
# Example for ipod photo: iPod_11.1.2.1.ipsw : 11 = Model (Photo) 1.2.1 = Firmware version
wget http://appldnld.apple.com.edgesuite.net/content.info.apple.com/iPod/SBML/osx/bundles/061-2694.20060912.ipDcD/iPod_11.1.2.1.ipsw
unzip iPod_11.1.2.1.ipsw 
  Archive:  iPod_11.1.2.1.ipsw
    inflating: Firmware-11.4.2.1       
    inflating: manifest.plist          
@end example

Ok, we are now ready to write the new firmware to the iPod.

If your iPod is HFS+ Formatted (your kernel supports 'mac-style' partitions??), use
@example
dd if=Firmware-11.4.2.1 of=/dev/sda2  # <-- this is the extracted image, do NOT write the .ipsw file!
sync
@end example

to upgrade the Firmware. If you own a FAT32 Formatted iPod (most common), use
@example
dd if=Firmware-11.4.2.1 of=/dev/sda1 # <-- this is the extracted image, do NOT write the .ipsw file!
sync
@end example

After @code{@w{dd}} finished (it can take some time), run a @code{sync} and unplug the iPod.

Please note: Your Warranty Is Now Void ;-)

And please don't blame me if your iPod dies...
@c ===========================================================================================



@c ===========================================================================================
@node Using GNUpod, Problems, Installing GNUpod, Top
@chapter Using GNUpod
@menu
* Preparation::                     How to mount and prepare the iPod for GNUpod
* Configuration::                   Learn about the Configuartion File
* Add files::                       How to add MP3 files to the iPod
* Search files::                    How to search for files on the iPod
* Remove files::                    How to delete files on the iPod
* Edit tags::                       How to change/edit/rename
* Creating playlists::              How to create a playlist
* Dealing with podcasts::           How to create a podcast playlist
* Adding cover artwork::            How to edit/add artwork.
* Unplug the iPod::                 How to unplug the iPod (Not a joke.. read it)
* Recovering files::                How to rebuild the Database if you lost the iTunesDB & GNUtunesDB
* Coexistence::                     iTunes/Music Match/xtunes/Ehpod user? Read this!
* Late 2007 iPods::                 Information about iPod Classic, Touch and 3th gen Nano
@end menu


@node Preparation
@section Preparation

Mount the iPod (I assume you mount it at /mnt/ipod) as described in 'Using FireWire with GNUpod'

If the iPod is freshly formatted or you never used GNUpod before with this iPod, run
@example
gnupod_INIT.pl -m /mnt/ipod
@end example

gnupod_INIT.pl will create the default directory tree and creates an empty GNUtunesDB 
(or if it finds an iTunesDB, it runs tunes2pod.pl to convert the iTunesDB to an GNUtunesDB)

Use
@example
gnupod_INIT.pl -m /mnt/ipod --france
@end example

if you would like to enable the 'EU-Volume-Limit' (=decrease max. volume).
This only works for iPods running Firmware 1.x

Your iPod is now ready for GNUpod!

@node Configuration
@section Configuration

(Note: You don't need to bother with the Configfile. GNUpod works fine
 without it, but it could make your life easier)

GNUpod >= 0.95 can read a simple Configfile.
An example comes with GNUpod, see doc/gnupodrc.example

Edit this file and save it as ~/.gnupodrc or on your iPod (iPod_Control/.gnupod/gnupodrc)


@node Add files
@section Add files

To add files, we use the script called @code{@w{gnupod_addsong.pl}}.

First, mount the iPod (eg. at /mnt/ipod) if it isn't mounted.

If you would like to add the file /tmp/foo.mp3, run gnupod_addsong.pl like this:
@example
gnupod_addsong.pl -m /mnt/ipod /tmp/foo.mp3
@end example

You can also use wildcards:
@example
gnupod_addsong.pl -m /mnt/ipod /mnt/mp3/seiken_densetsu2_ost/* /mnt/mp3/xenogears/ost?/*
@end example

It isn't possible to add the same MP3 multiple times, gnupod_addsong.pl detects duplicates 
(Duplicate = same filesize/time and ID3Tag name). You can disable the duplicate-detection 
with the '--duplicate' switch.

gnupod_addsong.pl understands MP3/WAV (RIFF) and M4A (Apple AAC - NO DRM!) files.

It can also convert FLAC and OGG files on-the-fly:

Using this example, it would convert the two files into MP3 and add them to the iPod.

@example
gnupod_addsong.pl -m /mnt/ipod myfile.flac myfile.ogg --decode=mp3
@end example

(Note: To use all features of --decode, you will have to install
 Audio::FLAC::Header, Ogg::Vorbis::Header::PurePerl, lame, flac, oggenc and faac)


gnupod_addsong.pl tries to 'auto-detect' the encoding of the ID3 Tag. 
Sometimes this works (in most cases ;) ) sometimes it doesn't. If it doesn't work for you, 
feel free to send me an example-file: pab@@blinkenligts.ch


DO NOT umount the iPod yet! First read the section 'Unplug the iPod'!


@node Search files
@section Search files

GNUpod includes a tool called @code{@w{gnupod_search.pl}} that helps you search for files.

Maybe you would like to search for the artist called 'Schlummiguch'. In this case, run
@example
gnupod_search.pl -m /mnt/ipod -a "Schlummiguch"
@end example

Note: gnupod_search.pl assumes RegExp input.
Please have a look at @code{@w{gnupod_search.pl --help}} for more information.

@node Remove files
@section Remove files

Removing files is done using @code{@w{gnupod_search.pl -d}}.
To Remove all files from the artist 'Schlummiguch', run
@example
gnupod_search.pl -m /mnt/ipod -a "Schlummiguch" -d
@end example


@node Edit tags
@section Edit tags

You can use @code{@w{gnupod_search.pl}} to edit tags (like artist, album, etc..)

@example
gnupod_search.pl --artist="Alfred Neumann" --rename="artist=John Doe" --rename="rating=100"
@end example

This example searches all files from 'Alfred Neumann', changes the artist into 'John Doe' and
sets the rating to 5 Stars (5*20=100)

Don't forget to run mktunes.pl!

You could also edit the GNUtunesDB.xml with a text editor :-)


@node Creating playlists
@section Creating playlists

Open the file @code{@w{iPod_Control/.gnupod/GNUtunesDB}} in a editor (It's an XML File).

To create a playlist named 'sweet' which holds the songs with the ID 1 and 2, create something like this:
@example
<playlist name="sweet">
 <add id="1" />
 <add id="2" />
</playlist>
@end example


You are not limited to use 'id', you can also use other attributes:
@example
<playlist name="bogus">
 <add album="seiken densetsu" bitrate="256" />
</playlist>
@end example
This would add every song from the album 'Seiken Densetsu' (<add.. is case INsensitive) with a bitrate of 256kbit/s.

Since GNUpod 0.26 it's also possible to use Regular Expressions (Regex).
See @code{@w{perldoc perlre}} to learn more about this

@example
<playlist name="Regex Demo">
 <regex album="^A" />
 <iregex album="^b" />
</playlist>
@end example 

<regex is case sensitive, use <iregex to do case insensitive matching.

It's also possible to sort a playlist:

@example
<playlist name="By Album" sort="album">
 <regex artist="bach" />
</playlist>
@end example

This adds all songs from Bach, sorted by album (a..z). You can use every
@code{@w{<file ..>}} item (id, bitrate, title..) for @code{@w{sort}}.
Add 'reverse ' at the beginning, to reverse the sorting:

@example
<playlist name="By Title" sort="reverse title">
 <regex artist="U2" />
</playlist>
@end example

You can also use Smart-Playlists with Firmware >= 2.x

@example
 <smartplaylist checkrule="spl" liveupdate="1" name="Example SPL1" >
   <spl action="eq" field="playcount" string="0" />
   <spl action="IS" field="artist" string="Jon Doe" />
 </smartplaylist>
 
  <smartplaylist checkrule="spl" liveupdate="1" name="Example SPL2" >
   <spl action="gt" field="bitrate" string="311" />
 </smartplaylist>
@end example

'Example SPL1' matches all songs from 'Jon Doe' with playcount==0 (= All songs from Jon Doe that heven't been played yet)
'Example SPL2' matches all songs with a Bitrate > 331.
(See also README.smartplaylists)

For more examples have a look at @code{@w{doc/gnutunesdb.example}} included in the GNUpod tarball.
Also check out http://blinkenlights.ch/gnupod/mkspl.html for a 'JavaScript SPL-Creator'

You can also use the --playlist option of gnupod_addsong.pl. This will create and add the listed songs to the 
named playlist.

Don't forget to run mktunes before umounting! (See 'Unplug the iPod')

@node Dealing with podcasts
@section Dealing with podcasts

Do not add podcast files in the same way as you add regular songs.  In order for
your iPod to distinguish between podcasts and songs, we need to make sure the
media type is set correctly. To add a single podcast do the following:

@example
gnupod_addsong.pl -p "Podcast Title" --playlist-is-podcast podcast.mp3
@end example
You can add multiple podcasts to the same title as well:
@example
gnupod_addsong.pl -p "Podcast Title" --playlist-is-podcast podcasts/*
@end example
This also tells the iPod to skip this file when shuffling files.  See
gnupod_addsong.pl -h for more options.

If you want to change existing playlists to
podcast playlists you just need to set the podcast flag to '1':

@example
 <playlist name="Test Podcast" podcast="1">
   <iregex artist="John Doe" />
 </playlist>
@end example

Such a playlist will show up as a Podcast after running mktunes.pl

gnupod_addsong.pl can also download podcasts and create such playlists itself:

@example
gnupod_addsong.pl -p "Heute Morgen" --playlist-is-podcast http://pod.drs.ch/heutemorgen_mpx.xml
@end example

Running this command will create a Playlist called 'Heute Morgen' (@code{@w{-p}}) and set @code{@w{podcast="1"}} (@code{@w{--playlist-is-podcast}}).
@code{@w{gnupod_addsong.pl}} will then fetch the podcast from @code{@w{http://pod.drs.ch/heutemorgen_mpx.xml}}, download all (new) files 
and add them to the 'Heute Morgen' playlist!

@node Adding cover artwork
@section Adding cover artwork

GNUpod can write cover artwork for video and nano iPods. The internal image format is model specific, so you should give 
GNUpod a hint about the image format it should use.

If you own a video (compatible) iPod, set:
@example
model = video
@end example
in your gnupod configuration file (found at ~/.gnupodrc or $IPOD_MOUNTPOINT/iPod_Control/.gnupod/gnupodrc , see doc/gnupodrc.exmaple for more details).
For the iPod nano you should use:
@example
model = nano
@end example
Late 2007-nanos need this setting:
@example
model = nano_3g
@end example
Late 2008-nanos need this setting:
@example
model = nano_4g
@end example


To specify a cover while adding files you'd use the @code{@w{--artwork}} switch of @code{@w{gnupod_addsong.pl}}. Example:
@example
gnupod_addsong.pl --artwork cover.jpg *.mp3
@end example


Use @code{@w{gnupod_search.pl}} to change/add artwork for existing files. Example:
@example
# Set cover.jpg as artwork for all songs that match album =~ /Katamari/i
gnupod_search.pl --artwork cover.jpg --album Katamari
@end example

don't forget to run @code{@w{mktunes.pl}} afterwards.

Note: Artwork added by GNUpod may vanish after using iTunes: GNUpod does not inject the artwork into the id3-header of the file.
If iTunes finds such a file (while scanning / changing tags) the artwork may get dropped.


@node Unplug the iPod
@section Unplug the iPod

Before umounting the iPod, you have to call @code{@w{mktunes.pl}} which will 
parse the GNUtunesDB XML file and convert it into the iTunesDB format.

Simply run
@example
mktunes.pl -m /mnt/ipod
@end example

Note: Since GNUpod 0.91, mktunes.pl has a '--volume' option which you can use to 
boost the Volume.

@example
mktunes.pl -m /mnt/ipod --volume 40
@end example

This would adjust the volume +40 percent. (You can also use '-100' to get 
a silent iPod ;) )

After @code{@w{mktunes.pl}} is done, you can umount the iPod and remove the sbp2 module
@example
umount /mnt/ipod
rmmod sbp2
@end example

Added songs won't be visible on the iPod if you did not run mktunes.pl before umounting the iPod. 
(If you forgot to run @code{@w{mktunes.pl}} before unpluging/umounting, simply mount the iPod again and run it)


@node Recovering files
@section Recovering files

If your computer crashed while uploading/deleting songs, you may
have some 'zombie' files.

In this case, you can use 'gnupod_check.pl' to search 'lost' files.
gnupod_check.pl will tell you what you could do to fix it.


If gnupod_check.pl found many errors (or you lost your GNUtunesDB.xml),
you can 'rebuild' an GNUtunesDB using @code{gnupod_addsong.pl}

@example
gnupod_addsong.pl --restore -m /mnt/ipod
@end example

First, it will create a clean, empty GNUtunesDB, it won't delete any songs on the iPod.
Then, @code{gnupod_addsong.pl --restore} will re-create a GNUtunesDB including the Songs which are on the iPod

I think nobody will ever have to do this.. but it maybe usefull to know that it's possible
(Note: Of course you'll lose your Playlists)

@node Coexistence
@section Coexistence

GNUpod can coexist with iTunes and other programs for the iPod.

If you want to use an iPod with GNUpod and used something other than GNUpod (maybe iTunes)
 to perform the last update (adding songs, editing playists.. doing something..), you'll have to
 use @code{@w{tunes2pod.pl}} to update the (outdated) GNUtunesDB.

Mount the iPod and run 
@example
tunes2pod.pl -m /mnt/ipod
@end example

The iPod is now ready again for GNUpod.

You have to do this because GNUpod stores its information in the GNUtunesDB, but other programs access the 
iTunesDB directly. After you did something with eg. iTunes, the GNUtunesDB would be 'outdated' and you would 
lose any changes you made with iTunes. Running @code{@w{tunes2pod.pl}} will write a new GNUtunesDB which
reflects the content of the current iTunesDB.


You sould avoid the use of 'extended playlist support' if you use your iPod with other programs.

The Playlist part of this file...
@example
<files>
<file id="1" title="hello" album="foo"..
<file id="2" title="boing" album="foo"..
</files>
<playlist name="extended">
 <add album="foo" />
</playlist>
@end example

..would look like this after using tunes2pod.pl
@example
...
<playist name="extended">
 <add id="1" />
 <add id="2" />
</playlist>
@end example

The songs are still in the playlists, but the expressions you wrote are 'lost'.

@node Late 2007 iPods
@section Late 2007 iPods

Late 2007 iPod models (3gen Nano, Classic, Touch) refuse to work unless the iTunesDB has been signed with a sha1 hash.
This hash helps to detect corrupted databases, prevents sharing an iTunesDB between multiple iPods and locks out
non-apple software. GNUpod is able to create the required hash value if it knows the iPods serial number, this is a 16 chars long hex
value such as: @code{000ba3100310abcf} and should be autodetected on GNU/Linux (via @code{/proc/bus/usb/devices}) and Solaris (via @code{prtconf -v}).
If GNUpod somehow fails to find the correct serial number of your iPod you'll have to specify the correct value using the @code{--fwguid} switch 
of @code{mktunes.pl}.

@c ===========================================================================================


@c ===========================================================================================
@node Problems, GNU Free Documentation License, Using GNUpod, Top
@chapter Problems

@menu
* GNUtunesDB::                      What is the GNUtunesDB?
* Get rid of '-m'::                 You don't like the -m switch?
* Known bugs and limitations::      GNUpod isn't perfect :)
* Reporting Bugs::                  How to report a Bug
@end menu

@node GNUtunesDB
@section GNUtunesDB

We talked a lot about the 'GNUtunesDB' and the 'iTunesDB' files, but 
why do we need these two files and what's the difference ?

Well, you can find the iTunesDB on your iPod at @code{@w{iPod_Control/iTunes/iTunesDB}} .
This file is read by the iPod when you 'boot' the device.
The iTunesDB is a small Database and stores information about all MP3s on the iPod 
(Title, Artist, Path, Bitrate...) and all Playlists: everything the iPod needs to know.

The iTunesDB is a proprietary file format created by Apple.

The GNUtunesDB (@code{@w{iPod_Control/.gnupod/GNUtunesDB}}) holds the same information like 
the iTunesDB, but it's a simple XML file: easy to understand by humans and easy to edit by hand.

Everytime you run @code{@w{tunes2pod.pl}}, the iTunesDB will get parsed and converted into an 
XML File (the GNUtunesDB). 
@code{@w{mktunes.pl}} does the opposite: it parses the XML file and creates an iTunesDB (for the 
iPod and iTunes)

Only mktunes.pl and tunes2pod.pl have to worry about the iTunesDB format: all other tools 
(gnupod_addsong.pl for example) only have to deal with the XML file called GNUtunesDB.

It's important to keep the iTunesDB and GNUtunesDB 'in sync', so everytime you change the 
GNUtunesDB (by hand or using gnupod_something.pl) you'll have to run @code{@w{mktunes.pl}}.

If 'you' changed the iTunesDB (using gtkPod/iTunes/Ehpod), run @code{@w{tunes2pod.pl}} *before* 
using any other GNUpod commands.


@node Get rid of '-m'
@section Get rid of '-m'

You don't have to use the '-m' switch if you set IPOD_MOUNTPOINT.
(Example for the BASH shell)
@example
export IPOD_MOUNTPOINT="/mnt/ipod"
@end example


@node Known bugs and limitations
@section Known bugs and limitations

@itemize @bullet
@item Smartplaylist support is incomplete (No liveupdate)
@item GNUpod doesn't like Audible.com and DRM Files
@end itemize


@node Reporting Bugs
@section Reporting Bugs

To report a bug, send a mail to bug-gnupod@@nongnu.org

Include as much information as possible.

You may want to attach the files iPod_Control/.gnupod/GNUtunesDB and iPod_Control/iTunes/iTunesDB.
But please use gzip or bzip2 to compress the files.

Please do not send me any mp3 files without asking me.
@c ===========================================================================================




@node GNU Free Documentation License, , Problems, Top
@include fdl.texi




@printindex cp
@shortcontents
@contents
@bye
@c gnupod.texi ends here
